---
title: "Kings Peak Hike N Fly"
date: 2021-05-25T21:32:03-07:00
draft: true
---
Saturday looked like it may produce decent weather for a trip to King’s Peak so I started asking around to see who was interested in joining me. It is surprisingly difficult to find people who want to hike a Paraglider 2065m and 6 hours up a distant peak just for a sled run down. By Friday evening I'd given up and was planning to go to Bridal Falls for the weekend. Then, at 7:00pm the phone rang. Sean White, back in town for only a few days tells me he’s always wanted to fly off Kings Peak and he is keen to go first thing in the morning. "Well..." I told him "I'd really intended to go Friday night and hike up Saturday morning. It's too late to drive up there now." Sean's reply: "Ya, that would have been better.. but what could be cooler than a one day, off-the-couch, epic attempt?". I couldn’t actually think of anything cooler so it was that agreed we’d meet at 6:00am.

Our plan: leave early, arrive at the trailhead at 10:30am, start hiking by 11:00am. Summit at 5:00, evaluate conditions, hope to fly down Saturday evening. If conditions did not permit it we would do a minimalist bivy and fly down as early as possible Sunday AM. When I was first introduced to paragliding, in 1999, the main attraction was to "hike up and fly down". I didn’t even know it was possible to soar or fly cross-country or do acro. I viewed paragliding purely as a way to save my knees on the descent. During my initial training my instructor was adamant that mountain flying is extremely dangerous and the weather in steep valleys is notoriously changeable and difficult to predict. I was told that hike-and-fly in steep mountains and narrow valleys should be viewed as the most advanced form of the sport... not to be attempted by beginners or even intermediate pilots. I really didn’t want to believe it but then one of my newly certified class mates, a mountain guide, rushed off to th Himalayas where he promptly broke both legs and some vertebrae on his third ever flight. This put the fear of mountain flying in me and I resolved to put it out of my mind until I was more qualified. On the ride up to the Kings Peak parking lot I learned that Sean shared much the same story. We had both climbed an hiked all over Vancouver Island. We each had been to the top of King’s Peak on several occasions prior to becomin paraglider pilots. We had each fantasized about one day flying from Kings Peak. By the time we arrived at the trail head we were both alive with anticipation. Each of us about to attempt to fulfill a dream of more than half a decade.

We stopped at a few locations to assess the weather. The sky was completely overcast with a thin layer of very high cirrus; the upper winds appeared to be south-westerly which would be about 20 degrees to the left of what we thought might be our chosen launch area (though that was based on rather vague recollection). There was no valley wind to speak of and the temperature was unseasonably warm - all systems go. After finding a suitable landing zone on a gravel bar near the river, putting up a few bits of flagging tape and filling our water bottles we parked at the trail head and readied our packs. It was to be “light and fast” so I carried a few nutrition bars and a bag of brownies. Sean had a few more bars and a sandwich. I carried a light emergency bivy sack and lots of clothes. Sean opted for a light-weight sleeping bag and less clothes. I guess my pack must have been somewhere around 25 lbs.

We hiked for about three hours before arriving at the snow line at around 1000m. After a short break we continued to ascend the snow chute between King’s Peak and Queens’s peak. From here on it would be a grueling slog over snow to the saddle followed by a final climb over rock to the summit. I’m not in nearly the shape I was the last time I ascending this mountain. As Sean kept a steady pace I did my best to keep up - panting and wheezing along behind him. The snow was just soft enough to kick sturdy steps in the steepest bits but with no ice axe, a heavy pack and wobbly knees I was still feeling more than a little exposed. The really disconcerting part was that we were facing a head wind blowing directly down-slope (SE). If this situation held to the summit then we would be facing a pretty serious tailwind on launch... and often at the summit the wind is stronger than on the ascent because we were likely in the lee of the prevailing wind. The euphoria of the opportunity began to give way to fatigue, doubt, and the specter of a night on the mountain. As I ascended steps
kicked into the icy snow I began to visualize climbing back down these same steps to find a suitable bivouac location. The snow was soft and friendly now, but I knew it would ice up before long and make the decent treacherous. As we arrived at the saddle between the two peaks we came over the back to breathtaking views of Mount Colonel Foster, Elk Horn Mountain and hundreds of other Strathcona peaks disappearing to the horizon in all directions - a stiff breeze blowing directly into our faces - from the East. Turing 180 degrees we looked up to our launch and down to LZ. The wind was not a good direction. Probably 90 degrees cross from the proposed launch and our entire fight would be lee off the prevailing wind. The discussion was brief and optimistic. "In the saddle the wind has to see venturi acceleration so likely there was less wind at the summit." and "No doubt the wind is forced to always be this direction in the saddle as all the wind must pour through here from this valley to the next it may not mean anything for the true direction on launch." and "It's only another 600' we have to go check it anyway." And so, we pressed on, after a good round of photos and a snack. Forty minutes later we reached the summit. For a while I think we both forgot why we’d come here. We actually forgot about the paragliders and just marveled at how absolutely spectacular our island is and how, as always, it is such a special feeling to be back in the mountains. As mountaineering goes, it's not a technical mountain at all. It's just a very burly hike.

Sean still had lots of energy but I was feeling the slightly thinner air and the fatigue had caught up with me. We took the traditional summit photos and congratulated each other, drank more water and snacked. Suddenly the moment passed and we were re-invigorated with the excitement of the prospect of flying from the top of the mountain. We turned to the task of finding a launch. There was a light breeze pulsing across the peak... perhaps three or four kph at the most. The slope we had been planning to use would have had the prevailing wind more than 90 degrees from the left. There was no really good launch facing directly into the wind but we found a snow covered slope that looked like it may work. Sean set up and prepared to go. The very light and very cross cycles were not cooperating. After a few attempts we moved to another slope hoping for better luck. Another half dozen attempts later and finally a stronger cycle and Sean went for it. I watched as Sean did a fantastic inflation, turned, and started his run down the snow to the edge of the rocky cliff... perfect... safely away from the mountain Sean turned left and headed out to try to soar the East face of Queen's peak. He did a full pass along the ridge at around 1800m without losing any altitude and then began a slow sinking turn... since he was at that point flying in the Elk River Valley - a different valley than our LZ, and the opportunity to cross back over was diminishing he gave up on the soaring and turned to circumnavigate back around Queens peek and headed out over th valley to our LZ. It was then that I discovered I was all alone at over 2000m. Somehow it had never occurred to me that after one of us ha launched the other would be left to figure it out solo. No problem, I thought to myself I saw how Sean did it: nice safe launch just be patient and take it easy... be certain... make it perfect... everything is good. I laid out my glider and climbed in... did my pre-flight waited for the next cycle... there it is... light but do able... pull... run... kite... damn... 90 degrees to where I want
be... a little right brake... steer it down slope... NO WAY. STOP STOP STOP... repeat... and again.... OK, time for a little break and to collect my thoughts.We had arrived at the summit at 6:00pm... started to prepare for flying around 6:15pm... I think it was around 7:00 pm
when Sean took off... now it was 7:30 pm. Still lots of light but if I was walking down I better keep the time in mind. Walk down? HELL NO! NOT EVEN AN OPTION! I set up my glider again... climbed in and waited for the next cycle...

OK there it is... wait - something is wrong... the wind is in my face and my glider is sliding downhill toward me. How can that be? It's been blowing the opposite way for the last 8 hours. So I waited for a few minutes. Sure enough cycle after cycle blow in from E.N.E. So, I unhooked again and wandered over to see what launch options were realistic faced that way. The ENE face is the steepest side of Kings Peak and it has a massive snow cornice. I dared not get to close so I couldn’t really see what was below but I knew it was a very, very long way down. Probably 1000' or more. The wind was not blowing directly up the cornice. It was really coming a little more easterly directly up a very gnarly rocky face below the true summit. It may have been possible to launch on that aspect but it would have been truly a desperate measure to choose that point for departure. Instead I laid out pointing as much into the wind as possible and facing over the cornice. The real blessing was that at least now the wind was coming up to more like 5kph - almost to the point where I could kite the glider. I chose a go/no-go line that was still probably 30 feet from the edge. I did not dare go closer. After another five or six attempts I was getting serious jitters about weather this was a good idea. Finally, I got a really good inflation, turned and ran toward the abyss... Glider feels good... or... maybe a little soft... look up... falling off to the right... center... steer... add energy... I’m at the “go/no go”... got to choose... yes!... yes!... here we go!

I pushed off the edge of the cornice. Beneath me was... well... nothing at all for an awfully long way... I watched the lip of the cornice break off and fall away beneath me. As it was virtually a no wind launch and building speed pushing through the snow is not easy I was not quite up to flying speed yet so my launch was a big arcing swing below the glider as it gained speed. I swooped over the last boulder jutting from the top of the head wall, just below the cornice.Now, anyone who knows me will recognize that I'm not really a screamer. "Wooooo hoooo" is not part of my everyday vocabulary but I let out the longest, loudest, most joyous scream of my life... I didn’t stop ‘til my lungs were void of air. Then I took a long deep breath and screamed again... and again and again. I lost count but it was lot of screaming. Sure I'd been nervous on top and I have to say that that launch is pretty much the scariest thing I've ever done but that is not why I was screaming. I can deal with nerves and fear. It was the elation I could not contain... I simply cannot explain
how absolutely free I felt right at that moment. Free to simply enjoy the moment... triumph perhaps... not over the Mountain... Personal battles in nature are never with nature... they are always with one’s self. What I felt was triumph over myself, finally after many years, and it felt good! From a 2000m peak with a 300m LZ I’d have a 1700m sled ride. With smooth air and a sink rate of 1.2m/s I should have about 24 minutes of pure peaceful bliss. I never take photos in flight because I'm always either too close to the ground or the air is too bumpy. I was snapping photos like crazy on this flight just doing great big lazy circles and enjoying the ride for 20 minutes.

Then I set up the landing... it was completely hairball... as was Sean’s, but that's another storey and it requires more hand
waving for full effect so you’ll have to ask me in person. Back on the highway, Sean picked me up and we shared the moment of realization that we'd both finally done what we started out to do in flying five years ago. Almost in unison we said "That was totally, totally awesome... let's NEVER do that again". We grabbed our beer from the icy-cold river and finished with a short celebration by the lake.
Thanks Sean, it was really great day. Lot’s of the best adventures come from spontaneous plans and this is right up at the top of the list. Five hours later we were back at home. I've always said that the best days are the ones where I fly longer than I drive... I
just changed my mind... ten hours driving, seven hours hiking and nearly three hours on launch for just 25 minutes in the air and was still my best flying day ever! Golf Sierra Tango over and out.
